Week 1 - Understanding Hadoop and HDFS Basic Commands
Introduction to the Hadoop Ecosystem and HDFS
The Hadoop Ecosystem is a collection of tools and frameworks that work together to manage and process
big data. HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System) is the backbone of the Hadoop ecosystem, providing
distributed storage and fault tolerance.
Hadoop Ecosystem Overview
The Hadoop Ecosystem is built around the core Hadoop components and includes tools for data storage,
processing, querying, and analytics. Here's a breakdown:
Core Components:
1. HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System):
oProvides distributed storage.
oHandles large files across multiple machines.
2. YARN (Yet Another Resource Negotiator):
o
Manages resources and job scheduling in the cluster.
3. MapReduce:
o
Programming model for data processing.
Supporting Tools:1. Apache Hive:
o
Data warehouse tool for querying data in HDFS using SQL-like language (HiveQL).
2. Apache HBase:
o
NoSQL database for real-time read/write access to large datasets.
3. Apache Spark:
o
Fast, in-memory data processing engine.
4. Apache Pig:
o
High-level platform for creating MapReduce programs using a scripting language (Pig
Latin).
5. Apache Sqoop:
o
Tool for transferring data between Hadoop and relational databases.
6. Apache Flume:
o
Tool for collecting and transferring large amounts of log data into HDFS.
7. ZooKeeper:
o
Centralized service for managing distributed systems.
8. Oozie:
o
Workflow scheduler for Hadoop jobs.
HDFS Basics
HDFS is the storage layer of Hadoop, designed for scalability and fault tolerance. It handles massive data
volumes by breaking files into smaller chunks and distributing them across a cluster.
HDFS Features:
•Replication: Ensures fault tolerance by replicating data blocks (default: 3 copies).
•Write-Once, Read-Many: Optimized for batch processing.
•Scalability: Handles petabytes of data across thousands of nodes.
HDFS Architecture:
1. NameNode:
oMaintains metadata (e.g., file structure, permissions).
oCoordinates DataNodes but does not store data.
2. DataNodes:
oStore actual data blocks.
oPerform read/write operations as instructed by NameNode.
3. Secondary NameNode:
o
Periodically saves snapshots of NameNode metadata (not a backup).Working with Hadoop:
•
Open a new terminal and start the Hadoop service by following commands
start-dfs.sh
start-yarn.sh
This command initializes all the required Hadoop daemons for the cluster to become
operational.
When you want to stop the services use the command:
stop-dfs.sh
stop-yarn.sh
•
Check the Status of Hadoop Services (To confirm that all necessary Hadoop services are up
and running, you can check their status using the ‘jps’ command)
jps
The ‘jps’ command displays the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) processes and should show a list
of Hadoop services running, such as the NameNode, DataNode, ResourceManager, and
NodeManager.•
Accessing Hadoop Namenode and Resource Manager:
To access the Hadoop Namenode, open a web browser and enter the following URL:
http://localhost:9870
Similarly, to access the Hadoop Resource Manager, open a web browser and enter the
following URL:
http://localhost:8088
•
Verifying the Hadoop Cluster:
You can check the Hadoop version by following command
hadoop version
Create Directories in HDFS:
hdfs dfs -mkdir /user/dir_name
List Directories in HDFS:
hdfs dfs -ls /
hdfs dfs -ls /user/
Transfer Files to the Hadoop File System:
hdfs dfs -put source-filename /destination_folder/
